We've just been through a long period of history,
since the end of World War Two, when Buddhism
was, in reality, collapsing in most of its
traditional homelands, but was perceived by
the West and presented to the West as being
in a period of renewal, revival, expansion
and growth.
To put it into two words, you can call it
the "refugee period" of Buddhist modernity.
Obviously, World War Two was followed by a
period of new nation-states being liberated
from the British Empire and the French Empire,
variously declaring independence and experimenting
with different forms of government.
It was also the period of the massive expansion
of Communism, something that young people
today can very easily underestimate the depth
and breadth and importance of.
Certainly [e.g.] if you were talking about
a young man growing up in Sri Lanka in the
1960s, or [e.g.] growing up in Tibet in the
1960s, or almost anywhere in Asia, the big
issues hanging over the continent in the shadow
of the atom bomb that exploded at Hiroshima
were the competing claims to democracy offered
by Communists, Western Capitalists, and different
opportunistic ideologies in the new period
of promised independence, after the fall of
European empires, or the declared fall of
European empires, at the end of World War
Two.
In that period, most dramatically and obviously
with Tibet and China, Buddhism was stamped
out of existence, but at the same time the
phenomenon of refugee Buddhism resulted in
a super-concentration of competing claims
to monastic authority in places like Hong
Kong, places like Taiwan, and, where they
managed to get a foothold, in America or Europe.
Of course many people were very eager to escape
to make any kind of a living and they were
eager to preserve any fragment of their tradition
that they could.
Of course, fragments that made money were
a lot more valuable than fragments that didn't.
So you got an unbelievable commercialization
of something like Tibetan tantric sex practices
that, within Tibet, 50 years earlier, only
a very small number of people even knew the
existence of.
Any kind of black-magic practice that people
would pay for suddenly became of great importance.
And, y'know, when you're talking about refugee
monks, literally homeless monks, often monks
who have witnessed their home temple being
torn to the ground, burnt down, books being
lit on fire and so on, that desperation, in
that period, was understandable, even if the
result was real corruption.
Taiwan existed as a world between worlds,
but many monks who were themselves World War
Two veterans, or at least had grown up with
the devastation of World War Two, and the
Sino-Japanese War, and the Korean War, and
ongoing wars in Asia, [they] had grown up
in extremely deprived circumstances with limited
education.
In Taiwan, in that context, you had many monks
presented with the impossible task of reconciling
several different traditions of Buddhism,
several different lineages, under one roof
of one temple.
They were being presented with the task of
saying, "Okay, we're gonna incorporate a straight-up
Maitreya-worshiping tradition, some kind of
mixed Guanyin and Pure-Land tradition, and
some Zen lineage that had a completely different
set of religious practices, and that may or
may not have been linked to Japan until 5
minutes ago, they may or may not be in a hurry
to cleanse themselves of their connection
to the Japanese empire".
Instant reformation was needed.
Instant top-down, hierarchical reform was
needed, with some kind of legitimacy that
would appeal to the public, to people who
paid for funeral rituals, and that would organize
the monks.
With all that having been said in sympathy,
that's why it's very hard for modern, western
outsiders to appreciate the desperation and
intensity with which all of Asia discovered
the philosophy of Nagarjuna in the late 20th
century.
I guess the mania for Nagarjuna really was
something like 1975 to 1990, very roughly.
Why did Nagarjuna become so important?
Well, suddenly, in places like Hong Kong and
Taiwan, Nagarjuna was a definition of legitimacy,
in Buddhism and Buddhist Philosophy, that
allowed some traditional practices to be maintained,
others to be toned down, neglected or rejected,
that allowed monks to stake their claim to
authority without having done a lot of reading
and that --to some extent-- also re-energized
the common ground between Chinese Buddhism
and Tibetan Buddhism.
Keep in mind that Tibet's own reformations
had revolved around Nagarjuna and a commentary
on Nagarjuna by Chandrakirti.
This sense that the philosophy of emptiness,
as it's called, was a central, defining element
of Buddhist philosophy, and that it was more
important than a long list of other principles,
that was something that had already proven
useful in the reformation of Tibetan Buddhism,
and so, in some ways, it's no surprise that,
in the midst of the 20th century's many crises
challenging monastic authority, Nagarjuna
was useful again.
The other thing, of course, was that you had
a period when the high-level literacy in ancient
languages (including classical, literary Chinese)
was very limited and very scarce.
There were very few people around who could
walk up to the wall of books that's referred
to as the Buddhist canon (or the ancient Chinese
literary tradition in general), who could
walk up to that, approach it, find what they
were looking for, and with confidence read
and interpret it.
Now that is not to say that the world of [e.g.]
the 1890s was full of such highly-literate
scholars, but it's difficult to exaggerate
the kind of free-fall that traditional learning
was in, including the disappearance of traditional
forms of employment, for people who aspired
to become scholars.
Of course that employment could include things
like letter-writing, simply providing scribal
services to people; throughout the Theravada
world of course there's a dramatic economic
and cultural change because there used to
be a whole class of people who were employed
in physically producing hand-made manuscripts,
and then when that class disappears, the opportunity
for anyone to really become a scholar disappears
(to a large extent) also.
So this is partly a technological change,
along with the dramatic political changes
that follow after World War Two, and it's
partly a scramble to create a new orthodoxy
that could still be perceived as ancient.
Of course, it's very convenient if that [new]
orthodoxy can be boiled down to one sentence
that everyone repeats again and again, namely
"Form is Emptiness, Emptiness is Form".
And that one sentence doesn't say anything
about monks refusing to touch money, it doesn't
say anything about the long list of monastic
rules that are being broken on a daily basis
and that did (from an ancient perspective)
define legitimacy in monasticism.
This isn't something I wanted to talk about
at length in this video but it's something
I wanted to reflect on in terms of the current
crisis of Buddhist institutions across Asia.
The intensity of the period of "refugee Buddhism"
has now ended.
What has it been replaced with?
Well, the attendant enthusiasm for Nagarjuna...
I've met a few older people who still are
enthusiastic (in the truest sense of that
term) about Nagarjuna solving all of the problems
in the religion, but they're fewer and fewer
in number.
The hopes of Theravada scholars all failed,
and I could give a long video-monologue as
to why and how that was.
Here I would just note very briefly that the
very earliest period of success for the Pali
Text Society (the Pali Text Society, based
in England, one of the few published sources
that made the most-ancient Buddhist philosophical
works available to the public); the earliest
period of their activity was not funded from
within England but was, in fact, dependent
on donation from the King of Thailand.
Thailand was then a very poor country of course,
and still today it's much poorer than European
countries.
The interesting thing about the 21st century
is that this same pattern has continued, namely,
that the rich countries go begging to the
poor countries for the sources of patronage
to pursue Buddhist studies.
Anyone can look at that situation and see
that it's the wrong way around, and can't
possibly work very well.
Still today, guys like Professor Richard Gombrich
go around trying to do fundraising, asking
for donations from much poorer places in Asia,
asking them to give money to England, so that
there can be Buddhist studies at universities
in England, at a much greater price.
In terms of cost-efficiency and so on, it's
all the wrong way around.
So that England can build on a somewhat non-existent
tradition of Buddhist scholarship.
And the reverse has not happened, or has not
been successful.
We do not have a situation where people from
California with money are great patrons of
Buddhism in Asia; no, on the contrary, you
get a list of millionaires from Taiwan and
Hong Kong who spend enormous amounts of money
to create Buddhist institutions in California.
So that is now a tradition that has gone on
for more than a century, of money flowing
uphill, money going from Asia to Europe and
the West, and the results of what happens
with that money, to say that the outcomes
are mediocre would really be an insult to
mediocrity.
I've said before in my videos on Youtube that
I do not believe the future of Buddhism can
rest on a lie.
I don't think that we can premise any kind
of scholarly or religious Buddhist project
on misleading the public, whether that's…
[interrupted by noise].
As you see, World War Two hasn't ended everywhere
in Asia yet, we still have fighter jets flying
overhead here.
Anyway, with the two or three tropes I've
just mentioned, it's pretty clear that now,
in 2014, all of them have run their course,
and much of the Western world has also exhausted
its own patience to waste money on academic
programs that, on the one hand have extremely
little scholarly validity, and on the other
hand don't generate money of any kind for
the universities hosting them.
So, whatever optimism led so many universities
in the 1980s to create chairs of Buddhist
Studies --there was definitely a period when
it seemed that every university had to have
at least one guy who could teach "intro to
Buddhism 101", or at least "intro to Asian
Religions"-- that has largely disappeared.
And, of course, gone, too, is any hope that
countries like India or Thailand would become
great centers of new scholarship, religious
or secular.
[Laughter.]
Now I'm sitting here wondering if I could
put any kind of positive spin on the end of
this video.
[More laughter.]